# Building 3C

This document describes our current setup and build process for 3C.
You may find helpful information about topics not addressed here in
the [general Checked C build documentation](../Setup-and-Build.md).
Some items here are potentially applicable to Checked C as a whole,
and we hope to eventually harmonize them with the Checked C
documentation as appropriate.

## Supported environments

We aim to support Linux, Windows, and Mac OS X. We do most of our work
on Linux and test the other OSes less frequently ([additional
information](README.md#which-checkedc-clang-repository-to-use)), so
you are more likely to run into problems on the other OSes; if you do,
please [file an issue](CONTRIBUTING.md#issues) and we will try to fix
it if it is severe enough. Getting 3C to work on Mac OS X [can be
fiddly](#mac-os-x), but we have managed it so far.

## Basics

As described [here](README.md#which-checkedc-clang-repository-to-use),
you can use either
https://github.com/correctcomputation/checkedc-clang or
https://github.com/microsoft/checkedc-clang (or, of course, a
third-party fork, though we can't be responsible for that). Assuming
you have already cloned one of these repositories, run the following
(from the `checkedc-clang` directory or whatever you named your clone)
for a basic build:

```
# Get a copy of the Checked C system headers. Use Microsoft's
# "checkedc" repository regardless of which "checkedc-clang"
# repository you use.
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/checkedc-clang llvm/projects/checkedc-wrapper/checkedc

mkdir build && cd build
cmake ../llvm -G Ninja -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang
ninja TARGET
```

where `TARGET` stands for the target(s) you want to build. For the
`3c` command-line tool, the target is `3c`, but assuming you want to
actually compile the Checked C source files generated by 3C, you'll
also want to build `clang` (the Checked C compiler, which is a
modified version of Clang). Executables will end up in `build/bin`;
you'll likely want to add this directory to your `$PATH` or write
suitable wrapper scripts.

Here is [how to use the `3c` tool](../../../tools/3c/README.md) once
you build it.

## Build options

Because all of LLVM and clang are built as dependencies, this may
consume up to ~50 GB of disk space, take several hours (depending on
the speed of your computer), and require ~10 GB of RAM. Incremental
builds will usually be faster. Here are some things you can do that
may reduce the build time and/or peak memory use:

- The above instructions already assume the use of the
  [Ninja](https://ninja-build.org/) build tool; you may have to
  install it. You can alternatively use `make` (remove `-G Ninja` from
  the `cmake` command and replace `ninja` with `make`), but Ninja is
  much faster in our experience.

- Pass `-DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86` (or whatever your machine's
  architecture is, e.g., `ARM`) to `cmake` to build only the parts of
  `clang` needed to compile programs for your machine.

- Pass `-DLLVM_USE_LINKER=lld`. This requires a sufficiently recent
  version of `lld` to be installed on your system.

- Pass `-DLLVM_USE_SPLIT_DWARF=ON`. We have tested the build with this
  option, but it may affect some debugging tools.

- Pass `-DLLVM_OPTIMIZED_TABLEGEN=ON`.

- Pass `-DLLVM_APPEND_VC_REV=OFF` to turn off embedding of your Git
  head commit ID in the executables and thus avoid the need to re-link
  all of them every time the commit ID changes.

(The reference for improving build performance is [this LLVM
page](https://www.llvm.org/docs/GettingStarted.html#common-problems),
but we have attempted to describe the most promising options here.)

You might want to use `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo` if you are
running 3C enough between builds that the faster running time
outweighs the slower build time or you simply want to test a release
build of 3C, assuming that's what end users will eventually be
encouraged to use.

## Mac OS X

On some OS X versions, you have to add
`-DDEFAULT_SYSROOT=/Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk`
to the `cmake` command; add it just after the `-DLLVM_ENABLE...`
flags. You also need to make sure that the XCode developer
command-line tools are installed, per [this
thread](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/issues/20791). Go to
https://developer.apple.com/download/more/, log in with your Apple
Developer ID, and download "Command Line Tools for Xcode 11.3.1".
Then, enable these by invoking (from the command line), `sudo
xcode-select -r`.
