# 3C: Semi-automated conversion of C code to Checked C

The 3C (**C**hecked-**C**-**C**onvert) software facilitates conversion of existing C code to Checked C by automatically inferring as many Checked C annotations as possible and guiding the developer through the process of assigning the remaining ones.  3C aims to provide the first feasible way for organizations with large legacy C codebases (that they don't want to drop everything to rewrite in a better language) to comprehensively verify their code's spatial memory safety.

This document describes 3C in general.  Here are the [build instructions](INSTALL.md).  The inference logic is implemented in the [`clang/lib/3C` directory](../../../lib/3C) in the form of a library that can potentially be used in multiple contexts.  As of November 2020, the only way to use 3C is via the `3c` command line tool in the [`clang/tools/3c` directory](../../../tools/3c); its usage is documented in [the readme there](../../../tools/3c/README.md).  There is also code for a custom build of `clangd` named `clangd3c` that can be used to interactively convert code from within an IDE, but it is currently unmaintained and fails to build and thus we have disabled the build target; we may revive `clangd3c` at some point.

## What 3C users should know about the development process

Development of 3C is led by [Correct Computation, Inc.](https://correctcomputation.com/) (CCI) in the https://github.com/correctcomputation/checkedc-clang repository, which is a fork of Microsoft's Checked C repository (https://github.com/microsoft/checkedc-clang).  Issues and pull requests related to 3C should be submitted to the CCI repository; see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information.  Changes are merged frequently from Microsoft's repository to CCI's and less frequently in the opposite direction.  While some automated tests of 3C are run in Microsoft's repository, the coverage of these tests is currently mediocre, so changes to Microsoft's repository may break some functionality of its copy of 3C.  Thus, users of 3C can choose either CCI's repository (for the latest 3C with a somewhat older Checked C) or Microsoft's (for the latest Checked C with 3C that is significantly older and possibly broken).  This workflow may change in the future.

As of November 2020, 3C is pre-alpha quality and we are just starting to establish its public presence and processes.  CCI is also working on a proprietary extension of 3C called 5C ("**C**orrect **C**omputation's **C**hecked-**C**-**C**onvert").  Our current plan is that 3C will contain the core inference logic, while 5C will add features to enhance developer productivity.  If you'd like more information about 5C, please contact us at info@correctcomputation.com.
